spec: Content Serve Authorization (#137)
web3-storage/specs: content-serve-auth.md

## Abstract

Content Server Authorization ensures that access to content is governed by UCAN delegations (User Controlled Authorization Network) and served by explicitly authorized services.
This mechanism allows content owners to delegate retrieval capabilities to specific services, ensuring that only authorized entities can access the content.

## Terminology

- **Space**: A logical container for data, identified by a DID (Decentralized Identifier). Authorization is granted for an entire space, and all data within a space shares the same permissions.
- **Delegation**: The act of granting specific capabilities to another entity via UCAN, and the signed document proving the delegation (also called a "**proof**").
- **Gateway**: A service (e.g., Freeway) that facilitates content retrieval and enforces authorization policies.
- **Delegations KV Store**: A key-value store used by the gateway to manage and validate delegations.

## Delegation Flow

The delegation process involves the following steps

1. **Space Creation and Delegation**

   - A user creates a space using the Storacha client.

>    - During space creation, the Storacha Client delegates the `space/content/serve` capability to the Storacha Gateway (e.g., Freeway) by sending a `POST /access/delegate` request containing the UCAN delegation.

Reviewer: > to the Storacha Gateway (e.g., Freeway)

To services designed to serve content from the Storacha Network to clients. For example an IPFS Gateway.

>    - During space creation, the Storacha Client delegates the `space/content/serve` capability to the Storacha Gateway (e.g., Freeway) by sending a `POST /access/delegate` request containing the UCAN delegation.

Reviewer: Would be good to have a formal definition of this.

   - The Gateway validates the UCAN delegation and stores it in the Delegations KV store.

2. **Delegation Storage**

   - Delegations are stored using a key composed of the space DID and the delegation CID.

>    - Multiple delegations can exist for the same space/bucket, allowing flexibility in access control.

Reviewer: Bucket?

### Delegation Flow Diagram

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Client
    participant Gateway
    participant DelegationsKV

    User->>Client: Create Space (DID)
    Client->>Gateway: POST /access/delegate (UCAN)
    Gateway->>DelegationsKV: Store Delegation (space DID + delegation CID)
    Gateway-->>Client: Delegation Acknowledged
```

> ## Content Retrieval Flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Content Retrieval Flow for an IPFS Gateway
```

When a client requests content

1. **Request Handling**

   - The client sends a `GET /ipfs/:cid` request to the Gateway.

>    - The Gateway resolves the associated space/bucket and retrieves the relevant delegations from the KV store.

Reviewer: I would avoid referencing "KV" anywhere - it doesn't have to be a key-value store, could be any database or even flat files.

# Content Server Authorization Spec

## Editors

- [Felipe Forbeck](https://github.com/fforbeck), [Storacha Network](https://storacha.network/)

## Authors

- [Felipe Forbeck](https://github.com/fforbeck), [Storacha Network](https://storacha.network/)

## Abstract

> Content Server Authorization ensures that access to content is governed by delegations using UCANs (User Controlled Authorization Networks) and served by explicitly authorized services.

Reviewer 2: > Even the spec says "UCANs achieve public verifiability..." and the UCAN WG GitHub describes "UCANs are decentralized, capabilities model authorization tokens."

Damn. I thought they'd stopped doing that in 1.0 when they became less like JWTs. Oh well.

The delegation process involves the following steps

1. **Space Creation and Delegation**

   - A user creates a space using the Storacha client.
   - The Storacha Client automatically delegates the `space/content/serve` capability to the Storacha Gateway (e.g., Freeway) by sending a `POST /access/delegate` request containing the UCAN delegation.
   - The Gateway validates the UCAN delegation and stores it in the Delegations KV store.

2. **Delegation Storage**

   - Delegations are stored using a key composed of the space DID and the delegation CID.
   - Multiple delegations can exist for the same space/bucket, allowing flexibility in access control.

### Delegation Flow Diagram

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Client
    participant Gateway
    participant DelegationsKV

    User->>Client: Create Space (DID)
    Client->>Gateway: POST /access/delegate (UCAN)
    Gateway->>DelegationsKV: Store Delegation (space DID + delegation CID)
    Gateway-->>Client: Delegation Acknowledged
```

## Content Retrieval Flow

When a client requests content

1. **Request Handling**

   - The client sends a `GET /ipfs/:cid` request to the Gateway.

>    - The Gateway resolves the associated space/bucket and retrieves the relevant delegations from the KV store.

Author: Not really. I was thinking of the S3 bucket as the same thing as our Space concept, so I started using them interchangeably. My bad.

>    - The Gateway resolves the associated space/bucket and retrieves the relevant delegations from the KV store.

Author: Good call. I will add that. Thanks

2. **Authorization Check**

>    - The Gateway validates the UCAN delegations to ensure the requester has the `space/content/serve` capability for the content's space.

Reviewer: Correct there's no UCAN auth in gateway requests. Eventually we'll implement bearer token based delegations allowing you to lock down who can access your content via a querystring/auth header.

   - If authorized, the content is served; otherwise, the request is denied.

### Content Retrieval Flow Diagram

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Client
    participant Gateway
    participant DelegationsKV
    participant ContentStore

    Client->>Gateway: GET /ipfs/:cid
    Gateway->>DelegationsKV: Retrieve Delegations (space DID)
    Gateway->>Gateway: Validate UCAN Proofs
    alt Authorized
        Gateway->>ContentStore: Fetch Content
        Gateway-->>Client: Serve Content
    else Not Authorized
        Gateway-->>Client: 403 Forbidden
    end
```

## Considerations

- **Legacy Spaces**

  - For spaces created before the implementation of Content Serve Authorization, the Gateway serves content without requiring authorization, provided no authorization header is present.

- **Access Tokens**

>   - :warning: The system supports the use of access tokens in request headers, although current implementations do not enforce token validation at the delegation level.

Reviewer 2: Maybe I'm not following. What *did* we build then? That sounds like it doesn't actually do anything. We ignore the `authToken` completely? (It's amazing how quickly the context gets loaded out of one's brain…)

- [Alan Shaw](https://github.com/alanshaw), [Storacha Network](https://storacha.network/)
- [Forrest Weston](https://github.com/frrist), [Storacha Network](https://storacha.network/)

## Authors

- [Felipe Forbeck](https://github.com/fforbeck), [Storacha Network](https://storacha.network/)

## Abstract

Content Server Authorization ensures that access to content is governed by UCAN delegations (User Controlled Authorization Network) and served by explicitly authorized services.
This mechanism allows content owners to delegate retrieval capabilities to specific services, ensuring that only authorized entities can access the content.

## Terminology

- **Space**: A logical container for data, identified by a DID (Decentralized Identifier).
- **Delegation**: The act of granting specific capabilities to another entity via UCAN, and the signed document proving the delegation (also called a "**proof**").
- **IPFS Gateway**: A service that implements the [IPFS HTTP Gateway spec](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/) to facilitate content retrieval, that _also_ enforces authorization policies.
- **Delegations Store**: A store used by a Gateway to store and manage delegations.

> ## Delegation Flow Diagram for an IPFS Gateway

Reviewer: Ok now we can refer to this as simply "Gateway"

```suggestion
## Delegation Flow Diagram for a Gateway
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Client
    participant Gateway
    participant Delegations Store

    User->>Client: Create Space (DID)
    Client->>Gateway: POST / (CAR-encoded access/delegate invocation)
    Gateway->>Gateway: Validate access/delegate UCAN Invocation
    Gateway->>Gateway: Extract and validate space/content/serve delegation
    Gateway->>Delegations Store: Store Delegation (Space DID + Delegation CID)
    Gateway-->>Client: Delegation Acknowledged
```

### Flow

> 1. Client creates a UCAN delegation granting `space/content/serve` capability to the gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Client creates a UCAN delegation granting `space/content/serve` capability to the Gateway
```

>    - The `space/content/serve` capability is delegated to the service(s) designed to serve content stored by the Storacha Network (for example an IPFS Gateway).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The `space/content/serve` capability is delegated to the service(s) designed to serve content stored by the Storacha Network (in this case an IPFS Gateway).
```

   - A `space/content/serve` delegation authorizes the service to serve data stored in a given space. Caveats MAY apply. The authorization is granted for the entire space, and all data within a space shares the same permissions.

>    - In the future, IPFS Gateways may support different delegation strategies such as: restricting access to specific CIDs, use of access tokens, restrictions on transport modes (http/bitswap).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - In the future, Gateways may support different delegation strategies such as: restricting access to specific CIDs, use of access tokens, restrictions on transport modes (http/bitswap).
```

> 2. Client wraps this delegation in an `access/delegate` UCAN invocation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Client wraps this delegation in an [`access/delegate` UCAN invocation](https://github.com/storacha/specs/blob/main/w3-access.md#access-delegate)
```

> 3. Client encodes the invocation and sends it to the IPFS Gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Client encodes the invocation and sends it to the Gateway
```

   - `space/content/serve`: delegation that authorizes the service to serve data stored in a given space to any client requesting it.
   - In the future, IPFS Gateways may support different delegation strategies such as: restricting access to specific CIDs, use of access tokens, restrictions on transport modes (http/bitswap).

2. Client wraps this delegation in an `access/delegate` UCAN invocation
3. Client encodes the invocation as CAR format and sends to `POST /`
4. Gateway validates the delegation chain and stores the delegation

   - For the Storacha IPFS Gateway, the Delegations are stored using a key composed of the space DID and the delegation CID, but the implementer can use any strategy to store the delegations.
   - Multiple delegations can exist for the same space, allowing flexibility in access control.

## API Specification

The IPFS Gateway needs to provide an endpoint with the following interface to process the delegation requests.

```http
POST /
Content-Type: application/car
```

### Request Body

- CAR-encoded UCAN invocation

### UCAN Invocation Structure

```typescript
interface UCANInvocation {
  /** The capability being invoked */
  can: "access/delegate"

>   /** The IPFS Gateway DID that will receive the delegation */
>   with: string  // e.g., "did:web:storacha.link"

Reviewer 2: **issue:** Oh, hold up, this won't work. `did:web:storacha.link` hasn't given us, the Agent/Client, the right to `access/delegate` with `did:web:storacha.link`.

**suggestion:** I think what we mean is
```suggestion
  /** The Agent sending the request */
  iss: string; // e.g., "did:key:…"
  /** The IPFS Gateway DID that will receive the delegation */
  aud: string; // e.g., "did:web:storacha.link"
  /**
   * The principal the delegations should be stored on behalf of--almost always
   * the same as the issuer.
   */
  with: string; // e.g., "did:key:…"
```

Author: Good catch! thanks! Just the `with` that we are using is the `Space DID`.

Author: ```js
const verificationResult = await AccessCapabilities.delegate
      .invoke({
        issuer: client.agent.issuer,
        audience,
        with: space.did(),
        proofs: [...accessProofs, delegation],
        nb: {
          delegations: {
            [delegation.cid.toString()]: delegation.cid,
          },
        },
      })
```

Reviewer 2: Ah, right, we do care what it is! Yeah, that looks like the right change.

  /** Invocation parameters */
  nb: {
    /** Map of delegation CIDs to be stored */
    delegations: Record<string, CID>
  }
  /** Array of UCAN delegations containing space/content/serve capability */
  proofs: Delegation[]
}
```

### Space Content Serve Delegation Structure

> (contained in proofs):

Reviewer 2: Wait, they're in `proofs`? But they don't prove the invocation. They should be attached blocks, no?

> (contained in proofs):

Reviewer 2: It's not part of the delegation chain, though: it doesn't help to prove that you're allowed to `access/delegate`. It's just what `access/delegate` ultimately operates *on*.
